---
title: "ChatGPT is fun, but it is not funny! Humor is still challenging Large Language Models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/chatgpt-is-not-funny
excerpt: 'This paper evaluates ChatGPTs ability to understand and reproduce human humor through exploratory experiments.'
date: 2023-07-07
venue: 'WASSA at ACL Conference'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04563'
citation: 'Jentzsch, S., & Kersting, K. (2023). ChatGPT is fun, but it is not funny! Humor is still challenging Large Language Models. In <i>Proceedings of the 14th Workshop in Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis. Association for Computational Linguistics, USA.<i>'
---
Humor is a central aspect of human communication that has not been solved for artificial agents so far. Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly able to capture implicit and contextual information. Especially, OpenAI's ChatGPT recently gained immense public attention. The GPT3-based model almost seems to communicate on a human level and can even tell jokes. Humor is an essential component of human communication. But is ChatGPT really funny? We put ChatGPT's sense of humor to the test. In a series of exploratory experiments around jokes, i.e., generation, explanation, and detection, we seek to understand ChatGPT's capability to grasp and reproduce human humor. Since the model itself is not accessible, we applied prompt-based experiments. Our empirical evidence indicates that jokes are not hard-coded but mostly also not newly generated by the model. Over 90 percentage of 1008 generated jokes were the same 25 Jokes. The system accurately explains valid jokes but also comes up with fictional explanations for invalid jokes. Joke-typical characteristics can mislead ChatGPT in the classification of jokes. ChatGPT has not solved computational humor yet but it can be a big leap toward "funny" machines. 

[Download paper here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.04563)

Recommended citation: Jentzsch, S., & Kersting, K. (2023). ChatGPT is fun, but it is not funny! Humor is still challenging Large Language Models. In <i>Proceedings of the 14th Workshop in Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis. Association for Computational Linguistics, USA<i>.